so I mentioned in the last video that
we're going to look at the executive
service interface now this is also found
in the java.util.concurrent
package and we use implementations of
this interface to manage threads for us
so that we don't have to explicitly
create and start threads and unlike what
we've been doing so far
now the implementation is provided by
the jdk manage things like thread
scheduling and they also optimize the
creation of threads which can generally
be expensive in terms of performance and
memory
now we still have to provide runnable
objects to the service because we
obviously have to code the tasks we want
to execute on background threads but we
don't directly manage any threads as
such the executive service
implementations allow us to focus on the
code we want to run without the fuss of
managing threads and their life cycles
essentially we create an implementation
of executive service and give it to the
tasks we want to run without worrying
about the details of how the tasks will
actually be run
so the executive service implementations
make use of thread polls now I'm not
going to be going into any great detail
about thread polls for this video we
really need to know is that the thread
poll is a managed set of threads
it reduces the overhead of thread
creation
especially in applications that use a
large number of threads a thread poll
may also limit the number of threads
that are active running a blocked at any
one particular time when using a certain
types of thread polls an application
can't run wild and create an excessive
number of threads in java
we use thread polls through the
executive service implementations
now if we want to we can actually
implement our own thread poll by creating
a class that implements one of the
thread poll interfaces and by doing so
we can configure how the underlying
thread poll
ultimately is managed but it's
recommended that we use the
implementations provided by the jvm in
most situations
now since thread polls can limit the
number of active threads
it's possible that when we asked the
service to run a task it won't be
able to run it straight away
for example if the maximum number of
threads has been set to 20
they may already be 20 active threads
when we submitted a task
in that case the task will have to wait
on the services queue until one of the active
threads actually terminates
now the executive service interface
extends the executor interface which is
only got
one method execute now the execute
method is intended to be a replacement
for the following code I'm just going to
just type some code in just to show you
what this does for us
so you've seen this code before
something like....
....so what the executor interface
execute method is meant to do is replace
that code
so the scenario of using this executive
interface we do something like...
....again r being a runnable and then we'll see examples of that
shortly now as with the lock interface
sub interfaces and implementations of
executor offer more functionality than
the base interface and we can do a lot
more when we use implementations and
executor like the executive service that
I have been talking about
we have to use factory methods in the
executors class to create the instances
that implement executor service
now we can create several different
types of executor services based on the
type of thread pool
we want the service to use the different
types of thread polls we can create is
really outside the scope of this video
and a fixed thread poll means that there's
only really ever going to be a
specific number of threads available to
process tasks at any one time
if all the threads are busy and more
tasks as a better execution those tasks
will just have to wait in a queue so let's
go ahead now and update the code that
we've been working on so that it
uses a fix thread poll so going to call the
executors.new fixed thread poll
method to create the executive service
that we are going to use and we're going
to pass in three as the number of
threads we want to manage one for the
producer thread and 2 consumers so
going to back up to the start of the
code after our code for the re-entrant
lock we're going to set up our executor
service
we're going to type....
....
....we need to pass the number of
threads in this case as i mentioned is
going to be 3
so we've got one for the producer
thread and another two for each consumer
total of 3
so we've created that for starters but
now what we need to do is change the way
that we start so we've got the existing
thread starting on lines 25 to 27
so we need to actually change that code so instead of being a new thread
we're going to instead do....and we
don't need the .start on the end either
when we do the same thing to each of the
other two threads the 2 consumer
threads
and then the last consumer thread so lets now
run the application now we've
added the executor service to see what
happens now everything seemed to work
ok but notice that it doesn't terminate
the application still running so we have
to actually terminate the application
manually the 2 consumer threads report
that they're exiting and we can see that
on the screen with the exiting text
there and we know that producer thread
is terminated
so why did the application terminates in
this scenario well the reason is because
we've got to shut down the executive
service when we no longer need it if we
don't shut it down
application is going to remain live
even after the main thread is terminated
so we need to actually call the shutdown
method to shut down the service
let's do that and i'm going to actually
add the commands or the command to shut
it down on the line after the lines that
execute it to start our threads....
....
so just run that see what happens
notice the application close this time
so when shutdowns called
the service will wait for any executing
tasks to terminate and you saw that that
happened in this case because we've
already scheduled three tasks three
threads and they went through and completed their tasks before
the service got shut down
so what it won't do after we issue that
shut down or after we call the shutdown
method is that it won't accept any new
tasks
now this is an orderly shutdown if we
wanted the service to shut down
immediately
we call the shutdown now method as opposed
to shut down in that case the service
will try to halt any remaining tasks and
will also throw away any tasks in tis queue
but there aren't any guarantees that it
will be able to do that now it's
possible that some threads will never
terminate
so it's always best to try and shut down
in an orderly fashion
just running it again to confirm you can
see that we've got a normal shutdown now
using an executive service for this
application is overkill but it's vital
for applications that use a large number
of threads because using them allows the
jvm to optimize thread management
now when we want to receive a value
back from a thread that we are executing
in the background
we can use the submit method now the submit method accepts a callable
object which is very similar to a runnable
object except that it can return a value
the value can be returned as an object
of type future
so let's look at an example of how to do
this so at the moment our producer and
consumable classes are runmables so
that we can't use them in this scenario
so what we're going to do is use an
anonymous callable class to show how
this would work so i'm going to put some
code after we set up our tasks before
the shutdown
i'm going to type in....
....
....and let's return something....
...
....
so we're going to do something like try
and make a bit of space for it
....
...
so just to be clear the call to the
future.get method blocks until
the result is available
so when we calling it from the main
thread application will be frozen until
the results available so we wouldn't use
this method in a UI application and in
fact we wouldn't use the services in the
java.util.concurrent packaged in a
UI application when working with javafx
we instead use the classes in the
javafx.concurrent package to
run tasks on background threads and to
process the results
the classes in the javafx package
leverage the classes in the java.util
.concurrent packaged in a way that
makes sense for UI applications and
as you can see from the code in fact
that i've added catches we can get can
also be interrupted and if the callable throws an exception
it's going to be translated into an
execution exception so I'm going to
finish the video here now in the next
video we're going to run this and look
at introducing a number of threads
and playing around with things and I
just fix this typo and then see you
in the next video